DAY 1  -  Introduction to Containers

we can create containers on top of vm or on top of physical servers

containers are light weight in nature  -> they don't have any operating system they use the vm OS

To create containers -> create Dockerfile -> Docker Engine -> to image -> containers

Buildah is an open-source tool for building and managing container images, developed by Red Hat. It provides a command-line interface for building, modifying, and pushing images, serving as an alternative to Docker for creating container images without requiring a running daemon.


DAY  2 - Docker Basics

Repo to learn Docker with examples. Contributions are most welcome.
If you found this repo useful, give it a STAR 🌠
You can watch the video version of this repo on my youtube playlist. -> https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7JZP345yVjw&list=PLdpzxOOAlwvLjb0vTD9BXLOwwLD_GWCmC

What is a container ?
A container is a standard unit of software that packages up code and all its dependencies so the application runs quickly and reliably from one computing environment to another. A Docker container image is a lightweight, standalone, executable package of software that includes everything needed to run an application: code, runtime, system tools, system libraries and settings.

Ok, let me make it easy !!!

A container is a bundle of Application, Application libraries required to run your application and the minimum system dependencies.


Containers vs Virtual Machine
Containers and virtual machines are both technologies used to isolate applications and their dependencies, but they have some key differences:

1. Resource Utilization: Containers share the host operating system kernel, making them lighter and faster than VMs. VMs have a full-fledged OS and hypervisor, making them more resource-intensive.

2. Portability: Containers are designed to be portable and can run on any system with a compatible host operating system. VMs are less portable as they need a compatible hypervisor to run.

3. Security: VMs provide a higher level of security as each VM has its own operating system and can be isolated from the host and other VMs. Containers provide less isolation, as they share the host operating system.
Management: Managing containers is typically easier than managing VMs, as containers are designed to be lightweight and fast-moving.
Why are containers light weight ?
Containers are lightweight because they use a technology called containerization, which allows them to share the host operating system's kernel and libraries, while still providing isolation for the application and its dependencies. This results in a smaller footprint compared to traditional virtual machines, as the containers do not need to include a full operating system. Additionally, Docker containers are designed to be minimal, only including what is necessary for the application to run, further reducing their size.

Let's try to understand this with an example:

Below is the screenshot of official ubuntu base image which you can use for your container. It's just ~ 22 MB, isn't it very small ? on a contrary if you look at official ubuntu VM image it will be close to ~ 2.3 GB. So the container base image is almost 100 times less than VM image.
                                         

To provide a better picture of files and folders that containers base images have and files and folders that containers use from host operating system (not 100 percent accurate -> varies from base image to base image). Refer below.

Files and Folders in containers base images
    /bin: contains binary executable files, such as the ls, cp, and ps commands.

    /sbin: contains system binary executable files, such as the init and shutdown commands.

    /etc: contains configuration files for various system services.

    /lib: contains library files that are used by the binary executables.

    /usr: contains user-related files and utilities, such as applications, libraries, and documentation.

    /var: contains variable data, such as log files, spool files, and temporary files.

    /root: is the home directory of the root user.
Files and Folders that containers use from host operating system
    The host's file system: Docker containers can access the host file system using bind mounts, which allow the container to read and write files in the host file system.

    Networking stack: The host's networking stack is used to provide network connectivity to the container. Docker containers can be connected to the host's network directly or through a virtual network.

    System calls: The host's kernel handles system calls from the container, which is how the container accesses the host's resources, such as CPU, memory, and I/O.

    Namespaces: Docker containers use Linux namespaces to create isolated environments for the container's processes. Namespaces provide isolation for resources such as the file system, process ID, and network.

    Control groups (cgroups): Docker containers use cgroups to limit and control the amount of resources, such as CPU, memory, and I/O, that a container can access.
    
It's important to note that while a container uses resources from the host operating system, it is still isolated from the host and other containers, so changes to the container do not affect the host or other containers.

Note: There are multiple ways to reduce your VM image size as well, but I am just talking about the default for easy comparision and understanding.

so, in a nutshell, container base images are typically smaller compared to VM images because they are designed to be minimalist and only contain the necessary components for running a specific application or service. VMs, on the other hand, emulate an entire operating system, including all its libraries, utilities, and system files, resulting in a much larger size.

I hope it is now very clear why containers are light weight in nature.

Docker
What is Docker ?
Docker is a containerization platform that provides easy way to containerize your applications, which means, using Docker you can build container images, run the images to create containers and also push these containers to container regestries such as DockerHub, Quay.io and so on.

In simple words, you can understand as containerization is a concept or technology and Docker Implements Containerization.

Docker Architecture ?
image

The above picture, clearly indicates that Docker Deamon is brain of Docker. If Docker Deamon is killed, stops working for some reasons, Docker is brain dead :p (sarcasm intended).

Docker LifeCycle
We can use the above Image as reference to understand the lifecycle of Docker.

There are three important things,

docker build -> builds docker images from Dockerfile
docker run -> runs container from docker images
docker push -> push the container image to public/private regestries to share the docker images.
Screenshot 2023-02-08 at 4 32 13 PM

Understanding the terminology (Inspired from Docker Docs)
Docker daemon
The Docker daemon (dockerd) listens for Docker API requests and manages Docker objects such as images, containers, networks, and volumes. A daemon can also communicate with other daemons to manage Docker services.

Docker client
The Docker client (docker) is the primary way that many Docker users interact with Docker. When you use commands such as docker run, the client sends these commands to dockerd, which carries them out. The docker command uses the Docker API. The Docker client can communicate with more than one daemon.

Docker Desktop
Docker Desktop is an easy-to-install application for your Mac, Windows or Linux environment that enables you to build and share containerized applications and microservices. Docker Desktop includes the Docker daemon (dockerd), the Docker client (docker), Docker Compose, Docker Content Trust, Kubernetes, and Credential Helper. For more information, see Docker Desktop.

Docker registries
A Docker registry stores Docker images. Docker Hub is a public registry that anyone can use, and Docker is configured to look for images on Docker Hub by default. You can even run your own private registry.

When you use the docker pull or docker run commands, the required images are pulled from your configured registry. When you use the docker push command, your image is pushed to your configured registry. Docker objects

When you use Docker, you are creating and using images, containers, networks, volumes, plugins, and other objects. This section is a brief overview of some of those objects.

Dockerfile
Dockerfile is a file where you provide the steps to build your Docker Image.

Images
An image is a read-only template with instructions for creating a Docker container. Often, an image is based on another image, with some additional customization. For example, you may build an image which is based on the ubuntu image, but installs the Apache web server and your application, as well as the configuration details needed to make your application run.

You might create your own images or you might only use those created by others and published in a registry. To build your own image, you create a Dockerfile with a simple syntax for defining the steps needed to create the image and run it. Each instruction in a Dockerfile creates a layer in the image. When you change the Dockerfile and rebuild the image, only those layers which have changed are rebuilt. This is part of what makes images so lightweight, small, and fast, when compared to other virtualization technologies.




DAY - 3

containerized  Django Application 


























Multi stage docker build

choose very rich base image like ubuntu that contains everything like curl , wget , etc

https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/distroless/tree/main

distroless images is the very minimalistic images which contains only runtime

Golang is statically build application , they don't even required runtime



Docker Volumes and bind mounts

Containers are ephemeral in nature  -> short lived
They share everything from host machines

Bind mounts -> directly attaching a directory from host machine to container

Volumes  ->  Better lifecycle , it will create logical volume in the host machine

docker volume ls
docker volume create <volume name>
docker volume inspect <volume name>
docker volume rm <volume name>

-v 
--mount -> gives u more verbose option

Key Differences between Volumes and Bind Directory on a host as a Mount
Volumes are managed, created, mounted and deleted using the Docker API. However, Volumes are more flexible than bind mounts, as they can be managed and backed up separately from the host file system, and can be moved between containers and hosts.

In a nutshell, Bind Directory on a host as a Mount are appropriate for simple use cases where you need to mount a directory from the host file system into a container, while volumes are better suited for more complex use cases where you need more control over the data being persisted in the container.


Docker  Networking
Networking allows containers to communicate with each other and with the host system. Containers run isolated from the host system and need a way to communicate with each other and with the host system.

By default, Docker provides two network drivers for you, the bridge and the overlay drivers.



Bridge Networking
Host  Networking
overlay Networking

By default the container talks with host machine using  docker zero , docker create a virtual eth  -> Bridge networking  is the default network in which both ip will be in same subnet

The conatiner won't bind any ip it will be using the host ip itself -> host networking

Bridge Networking
The default network mode in Docker. It creates a private network between the host and containers, allowing containers to communicate with each other and with the host system.

If you want to secure your containers and isolate them from the default bridge network you can also create your own bridge network.

docker network create -d bridge my_bridge


Host Networking
This mode allows containers to share the host system's network stack, providing direct access to the host system's network.

To attach a host network to a Docker container, you can use the --network="host" option when running a docker run command. When you use this option, the container has access to the host's network stack, and shares the host's network namespace. This means that the container will use the same IP address and network configuration as the host.

Here's an example of how to run a Docker container with the host network:

docker run --network="host" <image_name> <command>
Keep in mind that when you use the host network, the container is less isolated from the host system, and has access to all of the host's network resources. This can be a security risk, so use the host network with caution.

Additionally, not all Docker image and command combinations are compatible with the host network, so it's important to check the image documentation or run the image with the --network="bridge" option (the default network mode) first to see if there are any compatibility issues.

Overlay Networking
This mode enables communication between containers across multiple Docker host machines, allowing containers to be connected to a single network even when they are running on different hosts.

Macvlan Networking
This mode allows a container to appear on the network as a physical host rather than as a container.


Docker  Q/A

what is docker?
how conatiner is different from VM
what is docker lifecycle
what are different docker components
difference between COPY and ADD 
difference between ENTRYPOINT and CMD
what are networking types in docker and what is default type
Explain how to isolate networking between conatiners
what is multi stage build in docker
what is distroless images
Real time challenges with docker
   Docker is a single daemon process , which can cause a single point of failure . if the docker daemon goes down all the application are down
   Docker daemon runs as a root user 
   Resource constraint : if you are using too many containers in single host we can experience issues with resources , this can result in slow process and crashes
   
podman , buildhaa solves the issue of docker single daemon process

What steps you to secure containers



Docker-compose -> is used to manage multi container applications

https://github.com/docker/awesome-compose/tree/master/flask


docker init creates the Dockerfile  and compose.yml

